CSS - cascading style sheets

h1, h2, p - are selctors for CSS
color, text-allign... - properties
blue, 20px... - value
all together - is a declaration block


inline css - writing the code inside the HTML element AND DONT FCNKG USE it
internal css - writing the code inside the head element of HTML

<style>
      h1 {
        color: blue;             seperation of concerns
      }
    </style>

external css - creating a seperate file

for id elements - use #

main difference between IDs and classes is that we can not repeat ID names

convence is to use dashes for css double names

for class - use .

in real world we use classes, not IDs

RGBA - where 'a' is alpha and stands for transparency

shorthand property - to define different values for different properties

usding :first-child for a first element in the list (for example)

odd - нечетный

nth-child (nothing) - you can then select it by 1,2...also can use odd or even (четный, нечетный)

a:link - where link specifies anchors with href attribute

text-decoration - no underlines for example (where is the line, line stile, line color)

a:active - pseudoclass when you press the mouse button

---CSS Theory---

-conflicting declarations
Highest priority goes to ID. Next is class or pseudo-class. Last one is element selector. If there is multiple - last in code applies. But the first place goes to inline style. And above the first goes to !important.
Also, the universal selector (*) - the one that selects all of the elements has the lowest priority.

Anchors with pseudo-class has bigger priority than just anchors.

Not all properties get inherited, mostly ones related to text.

Inheritance - наследование

When changing something with href attribute - use :link. Always specify all 4 states of gref. Link Visited Hover Active

---CSS BOX MODEL---

content - text, images, etc. There we can define width and height.
border - padding (space around the conent and border, still stays inside the element) - margin (creates empty space outside the element, making space between elements then)
fill - filled with background color or background image.

final elemnt width = left border + left padding + width + right padding + right border
final element height = top border + top padding + height + bottom padding + bottom border

Collapsing margins - margin-top and margin-bottom of 2 different elements are not summarising.

Setting auto value for height and width is only needed, when dimensions were specified in HTML. Otherwise, it will attach automatically.

Percetange of width is a % of parent container.

inline boxes - take as much space as they need, no-line breaks after of before, heights and widths do not apply, padding and margins only applies horizontally (left or right). With css - display: inline;

block-level boxes - take all the space that they can and can not be side by side, occupy 100# of parent`s width, stacked vertically by default. With css - display: block;

inline block element - looks like inline from the outside, but behave line block-level on the inside - occupies only content`s space, causes no line-breaks, box-model applies as showed (margin, padding)

images are inline-block elements

//Absolute positioning//

Normal flow - default pos, (position: relative), elements are simply laid out according to their order in the html code.
Absolute positioning - position: abosloute. Element is out of flow, no impact on sorroundings, might overlap, we use top, bottom, right, left to offset element from relatively positioned contaqiner.  

*relatively - относительно

Pseudo elements - they do not exist in a code, but we still can style them. :: - selector
adjasent - смежный, соседний.

Adjasent sibling - is the very next element. +  -  selector

Any pseudo element is a inline element, so better to make it inline-box element.


